Lecture 09: User-Centered Programming Language Design, Part II
or: How (Not) to Design a Study
- Demographics
- "Data types"
- Prof. Rose's Worst Survey Ever
- Tasks

We will talk about study design, including how to do it badly. We'll
talk about several kinds of studies: (1) surveys and (2) task-based
usabilities studies. I'm not going to put you on the spot and
criticize your work in front of your classmates. I do want you to
learn from how I criticize my own examples, then go and privately
criticize your own work to make it better.

* Demographics in Surveys

It is typical for research surveys to ask for some information about
the people who answer it. The golden rule of demographic questions is:
"If you ask a question, you should be able to answer exactly why
you're asking that precise question and what you're using the answer for".

Good Examples:
- "Please provide your email address so the researchers can contact you to
   send you payment for participation and advertise follow-up studies"
- "Please provide how many years of programming experience you have,
   so that we can compare experiences of new and experienced programmers"
- "Provide your race and gender so that the research team can assess whether
   our outreach methods were effective in recruiting participants who are
   representative of our nation's diversity"


Bad Examples + Inclusivity Considerations:

Content warning: This section includes examples that are insensitive to racial
minorities and trans* people, for the purposes of teaching students to do better.

** Race Issues

When collecting racial data, it is important to recognize that
widely-used categorizations of race, such as the US Census categories
are... racist. They collapse hugely diverse groups of people into a
short list of categories chosen by their colonizers.

Example 1: Black/African American
Diversity erased by this category includes diversity of national origin
(recent immigrants vs. diaspora that have lived in the US for generations)
as well as groups such as Afro-Indigenous and Afro-Latine people.

Example 2: AAPI

This erases national, ethnic, and cultural diversity, collapsing
groups with vastly different levels of socio-economic privilege. For
example, Hmong students, from an under-represented and under-resourced
group, have been denied "underrepresented status" because other groups
within this umbrella are well-represented.


** Legal Issues

Be extremely careful when collecting data that could have legal
implications or other major life implications if it were made
public. For this class: simply don't do it. For research: these data
typically require an elevated level of scrutiny from the IRB.

Examples: "Immigration status: _________"
          "Intravenous drug user?:   Y   /   N "
          "HIV status:   +  /   -       "
	  

** Trans Issues

As a trans prof, I spend a lot of time talking about trans
issues. This does not mean that I think our issues are uniquely more
important than other minority groups, it just means that I think each
person should contribute our own expertise, and this is my expertise.

**** Name fields
Do not ask for legal name, just ask for "name". Many trans people have
not had the opportunity to change their legal names, and you are asking
these people to announce that they are trans if you say "legal name".

**** Gender fields

If you ask gender, ask it as a fill-in-the-blank question. It can be
tempting to do the following for data sanitization purposes:

-Male
-Female
-Other:  <fill in>

But this has two issues: one, it implies that nonbinary people are the
cultural "other"; two, it implies a ranking between "male" and "female".
Do not ask for "legal gender" for the same reason you should not ask for
"legal name". If you are absolutely required to do so, please be aware
that both Massachusetts and the US federal government recognize the
neutral gender marker "X" in addition to "F" and "M".

Do not ask for a person's sex in a survey. This refers to biology at
birth, not gender.

**** "Gender identity" / Gender modality

Whether or not someone is trans should be treated as protected
personal information, regardless of whether there are legal
protections. Only ask this if you have *very good* reasons, e.g., you
are doing trans-specific research. Personally, I prefer the term
"gender modality," which can be "cis," "trans," "nonbinary," "fluid,"
etc., over "gender identity" because "gender identity" sounds like it
is not identical to gender.


** Disability Issues

I am also a disabled prof, so I also try to educate on disability issues.

Most people will be disabled at some point in our lives, and
disability AI is a whole area of its own. For this lecture, let's
focus on a few low-hanging fruit for accessible survey design.

Vision:
- Use large fonts when you have vision-impaired participants
- Provide a screen-reader-friendly digital survey for blind participants
- If you use color, avoid using color as your *only* way of communicating
  information - you should redundantly communicate it in some second way
  for colorblind participants

Neurodevelopmental:
- When you have dyslexic participants, use dyslexia-friendly fonts.
  MS Comic Sans is often recommended for this. (Yes, really)
- If your participants have attention issues, allow them to take breaks
  as much as they want
- Likewise, be mindful how long the study takes and how many questions
  it contains (this applies to everyone, though)
- If you are doing in-person studies and your participants have sensory
  issues, make sure to choose a place for the study that does aggravate
  those issues (e.g., a quiet place with no extra-bright lights and no
  strong smells)

Musculoskeletal:
- Some people cannot write or can only write for limited periods of time
  using special arthritis-friendly writing tools (me). Provide digital
  surveys and/or make participants aware that handwriting will be required,
  so they can acquire any accessible tools in advance. (Providing them is
  even better, but some folks may prefer to handle it themselves).

  Provide breaks for this group too.

- If you are preparing a physical space for participants to take the study,
  make sure there is proper furniture if the participant needs to sit.
  Avoid places that only have stools with no back.

Summary of inclusive questions:
The Silver Rule is "Fill in the blank"

* "Data types"

Let's discuss different data you might collect during a study (both
surveys and otherwise) and how to get data that will help you.

** Quantitative

I sometimes push back on the widespread use of quantitative data
because I want to ensure you get useful data. That being said, plenty
of quantitative data are useful. Based on your specific project, my
categorization below may not apply. Some of my useful questions may
not be useful to you and vice-versa. I am providing only a starting point:

More likely useful:

- Relevant quantitative demographic info:
   "How many years of programming experience?"
   "How many hours of programming/week in that period?"
   "Years of education completed?"

- Performance metrics that are actionable:
  - "What percentage of documentation pages provided desired information?"
  - "What percentage of error messages contained information you could use?"

- Performance metrics that closely align with goals:
   - "How many minutes did it take you to write program X in language Y vs. Java?"
      (if you care about time)
   - "How many times did you revise your implementation of program X before it was correct?"
      (if you care about this)

Less likely useful:

- Performance metrics that do not align with goals:
  - "How many minutes did it take you to write program X in language Y vs. Java?"
    (Bad if time-based productivity is not your goal. Productivity could mean many things)
  - "How many lines of code did it take to do task X"
    (Bad if your goal is to write more readable or maintainable code, which would not
     necessarily be shorter than competing languages)
  
- Performance metrics that are not actionable:
  - "On a scale of 1-5, how much do you like the language?"
  - "On a scale of 1-5, how likely are you to recommend it to a friend?"

- Wildly irrelevant data
  - "How tall are you?"

*** Scales, etc.

Let's go into details of different ways to collect quantitative
data. When the data are objective and empirical, no special scale may
be needed. e.g., when asking for years of programming experience, a
simple fill-in-the-numeric-blank suffices.

For questions that require subjective judgement, more thought is
required, and several special measurement scales are often used
(keyword: "psychometric scales").

- Likert Scale

The best-known style of  psychometric scales are Likert(-type) scales.
A Likert scale question starts by providing a statement and asking
the respondent how strongly they disagree. For example:

How strongly do you agree or disagree with the statement:
"The thought of programming in Python gets me out bed in the morning"

A standard 5-point Likert scale has the following 5 responses:

1. Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Neither agree nor disagree
4. Agree
5. Strongly agree

Likert-scale questions can be analyzed both individually and in
aggregate.  It is common to provide several statements that assess the
same underlying design goal and combine responses using statistical
methods to produce a combined numeric rating.

- Forced choice

Whenever you write a Likert-scale question, ask yourself: Do I want to
let the respondent remain neutral or do I want to make them take a side?

Both options are valid and common. If you want them to take a side, that's
called forced choice. A 4-value forced-choice Likert scale looks like this:

1. Strongly disagree
2. Disagree
3. Agree
4. Strongly agree

- Acquiscence bias

Several cognitive biases occur in responses to Likert-scale
questions. One such bias is called "acquiscence bias": some groups of
respondents have a bias toward agreeing with whatever statement they
are given. A standard technique for accounting for (and measuring!)
acquiescence bias is to phrase half of the questions such that "agree"
correlates to the underlying variable you wish to measure and phrase
half such that "disagree" correlates to that variable.

Example:
"The thought of programming in Python gets me out bed in the morning"
"Python brings me misery"
"Python is my most favorite language"
"Python brings me life satisfaction"
"The thought of programming in Python keeps me up at night"
"Python is my least favorite language"
 

** Qualitative

Qualititative methods deserve at least one lecture all of their own.
Here are a few thoughts to get you started.

Platinum rule: "Don't ask if you don't want the answer"

This rule is not just a facetious one, but a serious one at the same
time. Of course, it is important in research to ask hard questions and
accept difficult feedback in stride. But it is also true that design
is partially a creative act of self-expression, and there are some
designchoices we make for our own satisfaction rather than pragmatic
purposes. If you know that you're going to stand by your design
decision for reasons of personal expression, don't ask people whether
you should change it. Likewise, keep scope in mind. If you have
limited resources for your project (you do), aim for feedback that is
not only actionable in general, but actionable within your constraints.

Bad examples:
[Asked 1 week before end of semester]
"What are the tradeoffs if my language is implemented as a compiler vs. interpreter?"
[If you specifically signed up to learn about functional languages]
"Why should or shouldn't  my language be object-oriented?"

Good examples:
[Asked now]
"What are the tradeoffs if my language is implemented as a compiler vs. interpreter?"
[If you are open to either answer]
"How should we balance our remaining time on better error messages
vs. a more complete standard library?"


** Open-ended language

To get extensive, open-ended responses, you need to phrase the
question in an open-ended way.

Palladium rule: "How" and "Why" are your friends.
These words invite the respondent to open up and provide their
full thoughts, rather than a short yes/no answer. Yes/no data
have their place, but they are quantitative.


* Prof. Rose's Worst Survey Ever

The following is an example survey I wrote to show you many bad
practices, all together. Use this to guide the development of your
own studies for your projects: see what I do wrong, and privately
check your work for similar mistakes, and revise the mistakes if
they are present.

[Editor's note: This survey is taken in person, on the platform of
a New York subway, using an off-white whiteboard marker, printed on
paper in 7 point Times New Roman font]
******* START OF WORST SURVEY EVER *******
Demographics:

Legal Name:
Preferred Name:

If you have undergone a legal name change:
Previous name:
Date of name change:
Method of name change:
Location of name change:

Gender [select one]: Female / Male / Not declared

Gender Identity [select one]:
  Agender
  All genders
  Androgynous
  Bi-gender
  Demi-female
  Demi-male
  Female
  Gender Fluid
  Genderqueer
  Intersex
  Male
  Non-binary/non-conforming
  Transgender
  Transgender Female
  Transgender Male
  Tri-gender

Pronoun [select at most one]:
  He/Him/His
  She/Her/Hers
  They/Them/Their
  Xe/Xem/Xyr
  Ze/Hir/Hirs

Disability Status[select at most one]:
  Hearing Impairment
  Learning Impairment
  Mobility Impairment
  Speech Impairment
  Visual Impairment

Marital status [select one]:
  Single (United States of America)
  Divorced (United States of America)
  Partnered (United States of America)
  Married (United States of America)
  Separated (United States of America)
  Widowed (United States of America)

Race [select all that apply]:
  American Indian or Alaska Native
  Asian
  Black or African American
  Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
  White

Ethnicity[checkbox]: Hispanic/Latino? 

US Citizenship Status[select one]:
  - US Citizen
  - Permanent Resident
  - Non-Citizen
  

Quantitative Questions:

What year did you start using a computer?
What brand of computer was it?
How many minutes a day do you spend on a computer?
On a scale of 1-10, how proficient of a typist are you?
Enter your typing speed in characters per hour: ___

Rate your responses to the following statements:

"I like the proposed language"
1. Storngyl Disagree
2. Disagree
3. No opinion
4. Agree
5. Strong Agree

"I am likely to recommend the langauge to a friend"
5. Agree Lots
4. Agree
3. Neutral
2. Disagree Some
1. Disagree More

"I think more people should use the language"
1. Agree as much as possible
4. Disagree a bit
2. Agree
3. Neither agree nor disagree
5. Disagree More

"This language should come pre-installed on computers"
6. Agree as much as possible
4. Disagree a bit
6. Simultaneously agree and disagree but in equal amounts
2. Agree
6. Neither agree nor disagree
5. Disagree More

Check all the following boxes that apply:

- This language reminds me of Java
- This language has useful features that Java does not
- This language could be useful to a programmer that struggled to
  learn Java.


Qualitative Questions:

"If time and money were no constraint and you could make any IDE for
programming in this language, what are all the features it would
have?"

"What is your favorite thing about the language?"

"Did your program feel fast?"



TASKS
• This is the hardest part of study design.
• You will not get this right the first time.
• Solution: pilot repeatedly

PARSONS PROBLEMS


DATA COLLECTION

THINK-ALOUD 


WIZARD OF OZ
• Have an experimenter simulate incomplete parts of the system
• Can give any kind of programming task this way if it doesn't require
running the code


NATURAL PROGRAMMING
• Want to find out how people "naturally" specify software.
• Yes, depends on prior experience
• Find people without experience
• Put people in a novel situation
• Constrain choices

TASK CONTEXTS 
