Lecture 10: User-Centered Programming Language Design, Part III

Today focuses more on qualitative methods, starting with survey
questions and then branching out.

- Qualitative Data Sources
  - In-depth, open-ended interviews
  - Observational studies
  - Written documents

- Interviews

Prepare a list of interview questions in advance. Interviews are often
semi-structured, meaning that although you prepare a specific
structure, you are not restricted to it. You want to learn the person's
experiences and thoughts, which may take you off script

** Writing your interview script.
Your script should start by obtaining consent to record the interview.

Next, it should start with the most general questions, proceeding to more specific
ones later on.

When writing questions, include follow-up questions, including probe questions, e.g.
  "How do you mean that?"  "Tell me more about that" "Anything else?"

These probe questions significantly increase the number of responses, often receiving
more than the initial question.

Questions should be phrased in a neutral tone, not implying one correct answer.

Exercise: Take the following question and:
1) rewrite it in a neutral tone
2) write your own follow-up question
3) write a probe to go with that question

Exercise question:"What about C++ is better than Java?"

- Observational Studies

If you want to see how a user interacts with your software, there's no
replacement for simply letting them interact with it and
observing. This style of usability study is open-ended and often
exploratory, helping identify new problems that you couldn't predict.
Because of their open-ended nature, they're not "experiments" in the
strict sense, but certainly are research.

** Picking tasks

This is perhaps the hardest part: what tasks will participants do?
You will get this wrong the first time, and the only solution is to
iterate and revise your task choices. In particular, iterate amongst
your project team before trying out the tasks on the whole class.

Example Starting Points:
"Write a program that satsifies this specification"
"Fill in the missing code to satisfy the specification"
"Read this code. Are there bugs? If so, which?"
"Here is a debugger. Debug this code"
"This code does not compile. Modify it so that it compiles"
Parsons problems: Given these code snippets, put them in right order.


** Preparation
- Identify whether your participants need training from you before study.
  If so, be wary of using only written materials. People may not read the
  materials, or may incorrectly assume they fully understood the contents.
  If there is training, there should be assessment of the training.

- Decide which tools will be used, such as paper/pencil, text editors,
  compilers, debuggers, and/or test frameworks. If using paper/pencil, be
  prepared as the interviewer to simulate any software that have not been
  implemented yet.

- Know how much information and help you're willing to provide, in very clear
  terms, before you start.

- Rehearse interviewing best-practices such as using probe questions, asking
  one question at a time, speaking in clear, simple terms, and providing adequate
  time to answer.

- Bring a notetaking device in addition to any recordings, so that you can go
  through the recordings "as-needed" rather than in their entirety.

- Keep a timer/clock in view so that you can record timestamps in your notes

** Revising Interview Tasks: Tips
- Identify the most important point of your language design, design task for that
- Task should be easy enough to be possible, hard enough to be meaningful
- Don't give too many tasks
- Minimize distractions, e.g., don't want to spend 30 minutes on whitespace questions
  if the language is whitespace-insensitive.
- Narrow task scope to only things you care about
- For big monolithic tasks, consider breaking them down into small tasks
  (unless your point is to assess integration of the smaller parts, big-picture thinking, etc.)
 
** Collecting Data
When observing a participant perform a task, there are multiple ways to collect data:

- Audio + Video + Screen recordings
- Eye tracking (expensive!!)
- Post-study Surveys (see Survey lecture)
- Think-aloud: have them think through thoughts out loud either after or during study.
  Prompt them to keep talking.
- Take lots of notes
  

- Additional Qualitative Methods

-- Grounded Theory

Motivation: If we don't want our preconceived hypotheses to guide the
research too much, then let's just... not develop hypotheses in advance.

Instead, observation of the study subject comes first. Record events
that occur, then perform "coding"

Here, "coding" is not "programming".  There are three steps to coding:
"open", "axial", and "selective", nicely explained by this blog post
by Tiffany Gallicano:

https://prpost.wordpress.com/2013/07/22/an-example-of-how-to-perform-open-coding-axial-coding-and-selective-coding/

To do open coding, read trough your data several times. Don't use an
existing theory to assess the data, just look for patterns that emerge
from these data, to come up with tentative labels for the data.

Example from blog post:
"Research question three: What irritates or upsets Millennials when receiving feedback on their work?"
Open codes:
 Getting called out
 Not being heard
 Mind reading and miracle-worker expectations

For each code, the coder lists example of participants own words that
were assigned that code, and recurring patterns/themes/experiences
for each code.

Next, to establish relationships among codes, generate "axial codes"
which each apply to some set of the open codes.

For example, "Not being heard" and "mind-reading" could both be
axially coded as "communication failures" and "getting called out"
might be axially coded as "public shaming".

Lastly, selective coding is the process of putting categories into
categories (core categories). Perhaps a selective code that combines
"communication failures" and "public shaming" would be
"absence of nurturing communication style."

-- Ethnography

In an ethnographic study, the research spends a significant period
living among a population and writes about their experiences, often in
a long-form format. Depending on the situation, ethnographic studies
have significant risk of reinforcing reductive stereotypes about
studied groups. In traditional ethnography, a researcher from outside
a community speaks on its behalf and their words taken with authority.
The risks of erasing a community's true nature is very real. Context
does matter, however. The risks of studying StackOverflow users are
not comparable to the risks of studying oppressed groups.

Nonetheless, a thorough knowledge of research methods includes the
following methods which can help sidestep limitations of ethnography.
 
--- Research-Practice Partnership

In a research-practice partnership, the external researcher takes on
the "subjects" as proper partners, meaning that they get to
participate equally in steps ranging from the identification of
research questions to writing and publication, typically resulting in
coauthor credit on publications.

Example: Prof. Rose is an autistic instructor with neurodiverse students.
Prof. Ben Pollard is researcher neurodiversity-inclusive education. Rose is
a practicioner; Ben took her on as a research partner.

--- Autoethnography

Autoethnography is when a researcher applies ethnography to themself.
Instead of overcoming the ethnographic power dynamic through teamwork,
it is overcome by building a research team consisting of the subject
group. Like all methods, it has limitations: if a sole author or
internally homogenous group of authors attempt to speak on behalf of
an entire identity group, they will fail to fully represent that
identity group.

An argument in favor of autoethnography would be to recognize that no
sole method can fully represent issues of identity, and that research
fields make their progress through the combination of methods by
different researchers.

Example: Prof. Bohrer is writing a memoir about gender and STEM academia.
It is a work of autoethnography.

Example: In 2020, a team of Black HCI researchers wrote
autoethnographically about their lived experiences of racism within
HCI

Example: Prof. Zoe Reidinger at WPI has written authethnographically
about queer issues.

Because authoethnography means researchers writing about ourselves, it
risks overemphasizing the importance of issues faced by researchers
rather than the general public, yet it does excel at addressinsg those
issues. For example, trans researchers have thoroughly cataloged trans
issues in academic publishing and made significant progress to resolve
them, but academic publishing only affects academics.

Nonetheless, autoethnography provides a valuable tool for the work of
diverse academics to be recognized as valuable by the broader research
community. It is human to speak about our own experiences, and as
educators, we end up frequently educating others on issues that affect
us on a personal level. This speaking, with repetition, often achieves
research quality. Autoethnographic scholarship is a route to give our
polished lived experience their proper status as "part of our
scholarship".

Concluding remarks:
We've talked about the division of study methods into quantitative vs. qualitative.
It is also helpful to divide studies by role: formative vs. summative.
A formative study helps guide the direction of research before the research is finished;
A summative study helps assess research's success or failure at its conclusion.
In this classroom setting, formative studies are far more important than summative, and
we have prioritized methods suitable for such.


Appendix: Example interview script from Aldrich's class:
1.How long have you been programming professionally?
2.Can you give an order of magnitude estimate of the size of the largest project you’ve
made significant contributions on? Number of people, lines of code?
3.In what programming languages do you consider yourself proficient?
4.How did you get into software development? Do you have a computer science
background?
5.Let’s talk about changes that happen to state in software you’ve worked on. Many
kinds of software maintain state, such as object graphs, files, or databases, but there’s
a possibility of corruption during changes due to bugs. How do you make sure that
state in running programs remains valid?
1.Are there specific techniques do you use? If so, what are they?
2.Do you sometimes want to make sure that some operations don’t change any state
or don’t change certain state?
1.Tell me about a recent time you did this.
2.How often does this come up?
3.Do you use language features to help?
3.Do you sometimes want to make sure that some state never changes?
1.Tell me about a recent time you did this.
2.How often does this come up?
3.Do you use language features to help?
4.Do you sometimes want to make certain kinds of modifications to state impossible
for some users of an API but not others? If so, how do you do that?
6.How often do you work on concurrent aspects of software? What mechanisms do you
use to control concurrency?
1.Do you use immutability to help address or prevent concurrency issues?
7.How much work have you done on security-related aspects of your software? Have
you found or fixed any vulnerabilities?
1.Do you use immutability to help address or prevent security issues?
8.Can you recall a recent situation in which you created an immutable class or other
data? If so, tell me about it.
9.Can you recall a recent situation where you changed a class from immutable to
mutable? If so, tell me about it.
10.Can you recall a recent situation in which you changed a class from mutable to
immutable. If so, tell me about it.
11.Can you think of a bug you investigated or fixed that was caused by a data structure
changing when it should not have? What was the problem and how did you solve it (if
you solved it)?
1.Would const have prevented the bug?
12.Have you ever tried using an immutable class and had it not work? Why not?
13.When you create a new class, how do you decide whether instances should be
immutable?
14.Have you ever been in a situation where you wanted to use const or final but it didn’t
say what you wanted to say?
1.or where you discovered you couldn’t use it? What was the situation and why
couldn’t you use it?
15.Have you been in a situation where you had to revise your plan because something
you’d assumed could mutate state was disallowed from doing so due to const?
16.Have you been involved in training new members of the team? What do you tell new
members about immutability or ensuring invariants are maintained?
17.Sometimes, though an object is mutable after creation, it only needs to be changed
for a short amount of time. For example, when creating a circular data structure, the
cycle must be created after allocating all the elements. After that, however, the data
structure doesn’t need to be changed. Have you encountered situations like that? Do
you think it would help if you could lock the object after all necessary changes were
made?
18.Now, I’d like to move on to API design in general. Think of a recent API you
designed.
1.Did you make any conscious design or implementation decisions, to make the API
easier or more manageable for these users?
2.Are there any recurring issues / challenges that users have had with your API? How
did you handle those?
3.How do you differentiate between users of your API? Are there parts of the API that
you expose some users but not others? How do you manage that?
4.Did you make any conscious design or implementation decisions to protect key data
or data structures from modification (inadvertent or malicious) from your users?
